
Human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus – update
 
Disease outbreak news 

 

7 February 2014 -
On 5 February 2014, the National Health and Family Planning Commission (NHFPC) of China notified WHO of ten additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. 


Details of the cases are as follows: 
Six of the cases are male , the age range is 5 to 67 years old. Cases were reported from Zhejiang (4), Guangdong (4), Fujian (1) and Guangxi (1). Five cases are currently in a critical condition, four cases currently in severe condition and one has a mild illness. Eight out of ten cases are reported to have had a history of exposure to poultry or a live poultry market.


 A 67 year-old farmer from Shaoxing City, Zhejiang Province, who became ill on 28 January and admitted to hospital on 2 February and transferred to another hospital on 4 February.  He is currently in a severe condition. The patient has a history of exposure to live poultry.
 A 35 year-old woman from Wenzhou City, Zhejiang Province, who became ill on 23 January and was admitted to hospital on 30 January and transferred to another hospital on 3 February.  She is currently in a severe condition. The patient has a history of exposure to live poultry.
 A 59 year-old woman from in Hangzhou City, Zhejiang Province, who became ill on 21 January and admitted to hospital on 30 January and transferred to another hospital on 4 February. She is currently in a severe condition. The patient has a history of exposure to live poultry market.
  A 49 year-old farmer from Hangzhou City, Zhejiang Province, who became ill on 21 January and was admitted to hospital on 28 January and transferred to another hospital on 4 February. He is currently in a critical condition. The patient has a history of exposure to a live poultry market.
   A 36 year-old man from Quanzhou City, Fujian Province, who became ill on 30 January 2014 and was admitted to hospital on 2 February and transferred to another hospital on 4 February. He is currently in a critical condition. The patient has a history of exposure to live poultry.
   A 5 year-old girl from Zhaoqing City, Guangdong Province, who became ill on 30 January and was admitted to hospital on the same day. She currently has a mild illness. The patient has a history of exposure to live poultry.
   A 42 year-old man from Zhaoqing City, Guangdong Province, who became ill on 27 January and was admitted to hospital on 28 January and transferred to another hospital on 4 February. He is currently in a critical condition. The patient has a history of exposure to live poultry.
   A 49 year-old man Foshan City, Guangdong Province, who became ill on 26 January 2014 and was admitted to hospital on 30 January and transferred to another hospital on 2 February. He is currently in a severe condition.
   A 56 year-old man from Shenzhen City, Guangdong Province, who became ill on 29 January and was admitted to hospital on 2 February and transferred to another hospital on 3 February. He is currently in a critical condition. The patient has a history of exposure to live poultry market.
   A 41 year-old woman from Heng County of Nanning City, Guangxi Province, who became ill on 27 January 2014. She was working in Zhongshan City, Guangdong Province and returned to Heng County on 28 January. She was admitted to hospital on 3 February and is currently in a critical condition.





So far, there is no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission.

The Chinese Government continues to take the following surveillance and control measures:

strengthen surveillance and situation analysis;
reinforce case management and treatment;
conduct risk communication with the public and release information;
strengthen international collaboration and communication; and
conduct scientific studies.

Sporadic human cases

While the recent report of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus being detected in live poultry imported from the mainland to Hong Kong SAR, shows the potential for the virus to spread through live poultry, at this time there is no indication that international spread of avian influenza A(H7N9) has occurred through humans or animals.

Further sporadic human cases of A(H7N9) infection are expected in affected and possibly neighbouring areas, especially given expected increases in the trade and transport of poultry associated with the Lunar New Year. 
WHO advice

WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid poultry farms, or contact with animals in live bird markets, or entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travellers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.

WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. 

As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern.

WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, in order to ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions. 


Current technical information as well as guidance related to avian influenza A(H7N9) can be found at the WHO web site: 


Avian influenza A(H7N9) virus


Human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruspdf, 194kb21 January 2014


Avian influenza in humans


Reducing risk of exposure to pathogens during slaughter and preparation of food



